Skeletal inclusions in approximately 99-million-year-old amber from northern Myanmar provide unprecedented insights into the soft tissue and skeletal anatomy of minute fauna, which are not typically preserved in other depositional environments1,2,3. Among a diversity of vertebrates, seven specimens that preserve the skeletal remains of enantiornithine birds have previously been described1,4,5,6,7,8, all of which (including at least one seemingly mature specimen) are smaller than specimens recovered from lithic materials. Here we describe an exceptionally well-preserved and diminutive bird-like skull that documents a new species, which we name Oculudentavis khaungraae gen. et sp. nov. The find appears to represent the smallest known dinosaur of the Mesozoic era, rivalling the bee hummingbird (Mellisuga helenae)—the smallest living bird—in size. The O. khaungraae specimen preserves features that hint at miniaturization constraints, including a unique pattern of cranial fusion and an autapomorphic ocular morphology9 that resembles the eyes of lizards. The conically arranged scleral ossicles define a small pupil, indicative of diurnal activity. Miniaturization most commonly arises in isolated environments, and the diminutive size of Oculudentavis is therefore consistent with previous suggestions that this amber formed on an island within the Trans-Tethyan arc10. The size and morphology of this species suggest a previously unknown bauplan, and a previously undetected ecology. This discovery highlights the potential of amber deposits to reveal the lowest limits of vertebrate body size.

Main
Aves, Linnaeus 1758

Oculudentavis khaungraae gen. et sp. nov. (Fig. 1)

Fig. 1: Photograph, computed tomography scans and interpretive drawings of the HPG-15-3 holotype of O. khaungraae.
figure 1
a, Photograph of the amber piece with skull ventrolaterally exposed. b, c, Scan (b) and drawing (c), left lateral view. d, e, Scan (d) and drawing (e), rostral view. f, g, Scan (f) and drawing (g), occipital view. h, i, Scan (h) and drawing (i), dorsal view. de, dentary; fr, frontal; hy, hyoid bone (or bones); jg, jugal; la, lacrimal; mx, maxilla; pa, parietal; pm, premaxilla; po, postorbital; qd, quadrate; sc, scleral ossicle; so, supraoccipital; sq, squamosal; th, teeth. Scale bars, 5 mm; longer scale bar below b applies to b−i.

Full size image
Holotype. Hupoge Amber Museum (HPG)-15-3, a complete skull preserved in amber; the block measures 31.5 mm × 19.5 mm × 8.5 mm and weighs 2.84 g.

Etymology. The generic name Oculudentavis is derived from the Latin oculus (eye), dentes (teeth) and avis (bird). The species name khaungraae is from Khaung Ra, who donated the specimen to the Hupoge Amber Museum.

Locality and horizon. Cenomanian age, 98.8 ± 0.6 million years ago11. Angbamo site, Tanai township (Myitkyina district, Hukawng valley, Kachin province), northern Myanmar.

Diagnosis. Very small bird with the following autapomorphies: jugal process of maxilla reaches caudally to the level of mid-orbit; jugal bar cross-section strongly angled dorsolaterally–ventromedially; triangular, dorsolaterally oriented coronoid process on mandible; and 23 teeth in the upper jaw, 4 of which are located beneath the orbit. The taxon can be further diagnosed by the unique combination of the following features: slender rostrum; antorbital fenestra reduced or absent; and scleral ossicles spoon-shaped, longer (from external to internal margin) than they are wide (distance between adjacent ossicles). Although the medial articulations between the premaxillae and dentaries are discernible, high-resolution synchrotron computed tomography scans reveal that the bones are partially fused. We consider HPG-15-3 to be skeletally mature or nearly so (Supplementary Information), and consider its small size and an unusual pattern of cranial fusion (with the premaxilla, maxilla and nasal fused into a single unit) to be diagnostic features of O. khaungraae.

Description
HPG-15-3 is mesorostrine (Fig. 1, Extended Data Fig. 1). The jugals are bowed laterally and the skull width is greatest at the caudal margin of the orbit. The upper jaw is wider than the lower jaw, the dentition of which occludes with the ventral surface of the secondary palate.

The cranial half of the rostrum is imperforate. Nutrient foramina are present on the lateral surface of the premaxillae, maxillae and dentaries. The premaxillae are partially fused medially, such that the right premaxilla can be clearly distinguished from the left in rostral or dorsal view. Articulation with the maxillae cannot be discerned, which suggests that these elements were fused to one another. The frontal processes of the premaxillae are elongate, and apparently articulate deeply with the frontals. The external nares have rounded rostral margins and tapered caudal margins.

The maxilla is long and toothed along its entire length. Caudal to the nares, the maxilla expands dorsolaterally until it reaches the rostral margin of the orbit, forming a long and broad nasal process. The jugal ramus of the maxilla extends beyond the rostral margin of the orbit, articulating with the ventral surface of the jugal (Extended Data Fig. 2). Medially, the jugal ramus of the maxilla contacts the pterygoid—whether this is through an ectopterygoid or not is unclear—and ends just caudal to this contact. The lacrimal has well-developed dorsomedial and ventral processes, and a very small dorsolateral process. The lacrimal is roughly trapezoidal in dorsal aspect; the rostral margin is wedged between the nasal medially, and the maxilla laterally (Fig. 1c). There is no clear evidence of an antorbital fenestra. The jugal and maxilla have a long, dorsoventrally overlapping articulation, such that the jugal forms the entirety of the concave, ventral margin of the orbit12. The jugal is strongly compressed, bowed and transversally inclined such that its cross-section is angled dorsolaterally–medioventrally. The caudal end of the jugal tapers dorsocaudally, articulating with the jugal process of the postorbital.

The large, Y-shaped postorbital forms a complete infratemporal bar and demarcates the infratemporal and supratemporal fenestrae (Fig. 1). The quadrate is angled dorsocaudally–rostroventrally. The otic process forms a single articular surface (Extended Data Fig. 2c, d). The triangular orbital ramus is short and broad, articulating with the pterygoid medially.

The orbits are large and entirely occupied by massive scleral rings; their internal margins are medially displaced (that is, the internal margin is medial to the external margin, opposite to the in vivo condition in neornithines). The ring consists of 14 scleral ossicles (the modal number in saurians). The ossicles are large, and their length is twice that of their greatest width. The internal half of each ossicle is rounded and the external half is strap-like, expanded in width externally. As preserved, the internal diameter of the scleral ring measures slightly less than the long axis of the ossicles themselves. An interorbital septum is not visible and the mesethmoid appears to be absent.

The frontals are long, slender and medially fused (Fig. 1). The parietals are unfused to the frontals, which is typical of nonornithurine birds (Extended Data Fig. 3d). Medially, the parietals are fused only along the rostral half of their contact. The parietals are large, longer than they are wide and domed. Their caudal margins form a delicate nuchal crest. The triradiate squamosal is unfused to the braincase. The occipital table is poorly preserved, owing to the activity of bivalves13 (Extended Data Fig. 4g). The broad supraoccipital forms the dorsal margin of the large caudally opened foramen magnum (Fig. 1f, g). Short paraoccipital processes project sideways at roughly the level of the dorsal margin of the foramen magnum. Only the dorsal surface of the brain is clear in the endocast, and reveals well-developed cerebral hemispheres that—in dorsal view—are as wide as they are long (Extended Data Fig. 4).

The parasphenoidal lamina is large and flat (Extended Data Fig. 2a). The palatal configuration resembles that of palaeognaths in having rostrolaterally projecting basipterygoid processes. The ptergyoids are cranially forked into a short maxillary process and a longer palatine process. The tapered parasphenoidal rostrum extends rostrally just past the midpoint of the orbit. The rostral half of the palate is imperforate, formed by the medially unfused palatal processes of the premaxillae (Extended Data Fig. 3c). The choanae appear to be level with the external nares. The preserved oral soft tissue bears a pattern of elongated papillae14 (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b).

The lower jaws are thin and nearly straight, with subparallel dorsal and ventral margins (Extended Data Fig. 5). The medial suture between dentaries is clearly visible; no predentary bone is present. The boundaries between postdentary bones cannot be discerned. A triangular, dorsolaterally oriented coronoid process is present at one quarter length from the caudal margin of the lower jaw. The bowed (that is, laterally concave) ceratobranchial elements are preserved with their cranial ends in contact with one another (Fig. 1e).

The upper jaw contains 23 teeth on the right side; 18 teeth are preserved on the left side. The rostralmost three teeth are somewhat procumbent. The apices of the rostralmost seven teeth are weakly curved lingually. The caudal teeth are conical and ventrally oriented. The mesial and distal margins of the teeth are gently carinated. The teeth lack basal constrictions and have expanded roots; they vary in size, crown height and spacing. The teeth are largest in the portion of the maxilla that is ventral to the external nares, and are smallest underneath the orbit. Each dentary had approximately 29 or 30 teeth, which resemble those in the upper jaw. The tooth geometry appears to be acrodont to pleurodont; no grooves or sockets are discernable.

Discussion
The skull of O. khaungraae reveals a general avian morphology, including a slender, tapering rostrum with retracted naris, an enlarged and well-defined eye socket, a short compressed postorbital region and a dome-shaped skull roof. O. khaungraae appears to represent the smallest known Mesozoic dinosaur, rivalling the extant bee hummingbird—the smallest known dinosaur of all time—in size (Fig. 2). The length of the postrostral portion of the skull (measured from the contact between the nasal and frontal at the sagittal line to the caudal end of the cranium) is 7.1 mm, compared to 8.8 mm in the vervain hummingbird (Mellisuga minima)—which is only slightly larger than the bee hummingbird15. No other group of living birds features species with similarly small crania in adults (Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 6). The discovery of Oculudenativs highlights the presence of diminutive members of vertebrate faunas that possibly can only be studied through preservation in amber, which represents a taphonomic filter capturing the lowest end of the body-size spectrum. This discovery is also consistent with hypotheses that the Cretaceous Burmese amber from the Angbamo site formed in an island arc, as miniaturization most commonly arises in island environments10,16.

Fig. 2: Proportions of the eye socket relative to the skull in HPG-15-3, compared to extant birds.
figure 2
The plot of log10-transformed orbit length (y axis) versus log10-transformed skull length for extant bird species (grey triangles) (n = 206), with the phylogenetic generalized least squares line obtained for the majority-rule consensus tree for the Hackett backbone tree set (see ‘Scaling of eye socket and skull length’ sections in the Methods and Supplementary Information for details). The skull of HPG-15-3 (red square) is smaller than any of the extant birds that we included, but the eye socket is about as large as expected if the fitted line is extended towards HPG-15-3. The skull drawings of M. minima (purple square), O. khaungraae (red square) and Gallus gallus (blue square) are depicted to a relative scale (scale bar equals 10 mm). The yellow and black squares plot the ostrich (Struthio camelus) and the greater rhea (Rhea americana), respectively. The silhouettes depict the body size of Oculudentavis relative to Mellisuga, Struthio and Gallus (colours of the silhouettes correspond to their respective data points).

Full size image
HPG-15-3 displays morphologies that, to our knowledge, have not previously been observed in any bird; these morphologies include features that depart from the theropod condition altogether (for example, spoon-shaped scleral ossicles and acrodont to pleurodont dentition), as well as an unusual combination of traits that are primitive (for example, complete postorbital bar and extensive tooth row) and advanced (for example, an expanded imperforate portion of the rostrum and an orbit confluent with antorbital fenestra) for avians. Nearly all of these unusual morphologies can be interpreted as the effects of miniaturization, which is commonly associated with the reappearance of plesiomorphic morphologies, increased bone fusion and proportionally enlarged sensory organs (for example, the eye and middle ear)9,16,17. Miniaturization is most commonly associated with paedomorphism that results from progenesis9,18. However, the skull of Oculudentavis reveals no obvious paedomorphic features (for example, a proportionally large orbit and short rostrum), which suggests that miniaturization in this lineage may have been achieved by a reduction in growth rate9.

The degree of fusion between the skull bones that form each half of the rostrum and the pattern in which the sutures have closed is highly unusual among nonneornithine theropods. In early birds, the premaxillary bodies—followed by the dentaries—are consistently the first skull elements to fuse in both an ontogenetic and phylogenetic context, and these sutures are completely obliterated in mature specimens of some taxa (for example, Confuciusornithiformes and the enantiornithine Gobipteryx)19,20. In Late Cretaceous ornithurines the mandibular bones remain unfused, although the premaxillae form a single element12. In Gobipteryx and neornithines, the premaxillae fuse into a single element during embryonic development20,21. The pattern of fusion in HPG-15-3 departs from this pattern and is distinct from all other known theropods, highlighting the enigmatic nature of Oculudentavis. This fusion pattern may be related to structural constraints that are imparted by miniaturization9 and to the predatory ecology inferred for this animal.

The scleral ring of Oculudentavis is very different from that preserved in any known Mesozoic dinosaur, in which the ossicles are typically nearly square-to-rectangular, narrow and demarcate a proportionally larger aperture (as seen, for example, in Archaeopteryx, Sapeornis and Yixianornis). In HPG-15-3, the scleral ring is very large and is formed by elongated spoon-shaped ossicles; a morphology similar to this is otherwise known only in lizards (for example, Lacerta viridis)22. The relatively small aperture defined by the scleral ring of Oculudentavis suggests unique visual capabilities compared to other Mesozoic theropods (Fig. 3), and indicates that the maximum size of the pupil was fairly small, limiting the amount of light entering the eye23,24. Even accounting for a range of values, this morphology suggests a diurnal lifestyle in photopic light environments25 (Fig. 3). Although both scleral rings appeared deformed, the elongation of the ossicles—together with the bowed morphology of the jugal bar—suggests that these elements would have defined a conical eye similar to that of some extant birds (Extended Data Figs. 7, 8) and lizards22. Nanoid taxa typically have enlarged eyes9,17 that result from negatively allometric scaling of the eyes to body size. Oculudentavis follows this pattern and falls where expected in a linear regression of avian orbit size relative to skull length (Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 9). The laterally bulging eyes of Oculudentavis, as indicated by the angled morphology of the jugal bar, probably represent an alternative strategy for increasing eye size without further increasing the size of the orbit. Notably, Oculudentavis lacks the forward-facing position of the eyes of owls and living birds of prey; the eyes are laterally oriented such that binocular vision was absent, or largely limited. Given the unusual morphologies observed in HPG-15-3, extant analogues for the visual abilities of Oculudentavis may not exist.

Fig. 3: A star plot illustrating the functional morphospace of scleral-ring and orbit morphology of modern saurians in the context of their diel activity pattern.
figure 3
The x axis (labelled ‘geomm’) represents the log10-transformed geometric mean of orbit length and the external and internal scleral-ring diameters, and the y axis (labelled ‘opt’) is formed by the optical ratio. Triangles indicate squamates (n = 60 species); circles indicate birds (n = 104 species). Ellipses represent 95% confidence areas for cathemeral (green), diurnal (orange) and nocturnal (purple) groups, drawn around the respective average x and y values for each group. Density plots illustrate the distribution of data along the x and y axes, delineated by groups of diel activity pattern. The retrodeformed eyes of HPG-15-3 are most similar in shape and size to the eyes of diurnal squamates. The black oval around the data points representing the left and right eyes of HPG-15-3 represent the 95% confidence ellipse, indicating the range of values estimated by our sensitivity analysis. The average of the geometric mean of all eye variables and the optical ratio for the retrodeformed left and right eyes were calculated and used to generate a distribution of possible combinations spanning ±30% of the left- and right-eye averages.

Full size image
Although miniaturization is often associated with edentulism9, Oculudentavis possesses an extensive dentition with unusual features. First, the acrodont to pleurodont geometry of tooth implantation differs from the thecodont condition in all other dinosaurs. Second, the tooth row extends ventral to the orbit; this condition is otherwise only observed among coelurosaur theropods in the Late Cretaceous ornithurine bird Ichthyornis12,26. In most coelurosaurs (including Aves), the maxillary tooth row typically extends as far caudally as the rostral half of the antorbital fenestra (well cranial to the orbit27), although the tooth row extends nearly to the jugal–lacrimal contact in some troodontids28 and in Ichthyornis one tooth is located caudal to the lacrimal and beneath the orbit. The tooth row is even more caudally extensive in Oculudentavis, which has four maxillary teeth underlying the orbit. HPG-15-3 has more teeth than any other known Mesozoic bird, which highlights both the importance of dentition in the feeding strategies of Cretaceous avians and the existence of strong positive selection for teeth despite the overall avian trend towards edentulism29. Increased dentition in Cretaceous birds has previously been correlated with piscivory29. However, the papillae preserved on the tongue and ventral surface of the upper jaw of Oculudentavis (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b) lack the long, sharp and caudally oriented morphology that is present in many extant piscivorous birds14. Although unexpected for its small size, the large number of teeth—as well as their sharp and carinated morphology—suggests that Oculudentavis was a predator, probably feeding on small arthropods and other invertebrates (which are abundant in amber inclusions from the Angbamo site). The evolution of island nanism has been linked to a previously unrecognized ecological guild specialized in feeding on small invertebrates in Paedophryne frogs (a group that includes the smallest known vertebrate in the world30), and a similar diet is possible for Oculudentavis.

Oculudentavis retains the plesiomorphic diapsid condition that is present in most nonornithothoracine birds, whereas the infratemporal bar was independently lost among enantiornithines and ornithuromorphs27. Retention of the postorbital bar suggests limited cranial kinesis19, consistent with the absence of a distinct craniofacial hinge and with data that suggest avian cranial kinesis is mostly a morphological novelty of neognaths31. The largely akinetic skull morphology of Oculudentavis suggests a bite force that is relatively stronger than that of a neornithine of the same size32, which is supported by the unusual degree of cranial fusion33, the presence of a well-developed coronoid process and the absence of an antorbital fenestra. A distinct coronoid process is not developed in any other Mesozoic bird but it is well-developed in predatory birds of the Cenozoic era, such as phorusrhacids34. In archosaurs, this process provides attachment for adductor muscles35. Reduction in pneumatic features may suggest that, in the Oculudentavis lineage, solid bone was favoured biomechanically over opportunistic pneumatization36. This reinforcement of the skull may reflect the predatory lifestyle inferred for Oculudentavis. Alternatively, the loss of the antorbital fenestra may be a consequence of miniaturization, and provide additional space for the enlarged orbit9.

HPG-15-3 preserves no features that unambiguously indicate its phylogenetic position, although the sum of the observed morphologies suggests that the taxon falls outside Ornithuromorpha. The extensive tooth row resembles noncoelurosaur theropods26 and the ornithurine Ichthyornis12, whereas the presence of premaxillary teeth (which are absent in the ornithurines Hesperornis and Ichthyornis), complete infratemporal and supratemporal fenestrae (which are typically absent in Ornithothoraces)37, the quadrate with a broad orbital process (which is typically narrow in Ornithuromorpha) and the absence of a predentary (which is present in toothed Cretaceous ornithuromorphs)38 all suggest a more-basal position. However, nonornithothoracine avian lineages (for example, Jeholornis and Sapeornis) are typically much larger than Cretaceous ornithothoracines—particularly the enantiornithines. Miniaturization is strongly associated with extreme homoplasy, which obfuscates phylogeny9. Our cladistic analysis using a priori weights produces a poorly resolved consensus tree in which all birds more derived than Archaeopteryx form a polytomy (Extended Data Fig. 10a). Approximately 90% of all equal-length trees resolve Oculudentavis as more derived than Archaeopteryx but basal to Jeholornis; the remaining 10% place it within Enantiornithes. Using implied weights (which is recommended for taxa characterized by strong homoplasy, including Aves39,40,41), our analysis consistently resolves Oculudentavis as intermediate between Archaeopteryx and Jeholornis (Fig. 4, Extended Data Fig. 10b, Supplementary Information). If this hypothesis were to be supported by additional postcranial data, HPG-15-3 could possibly represent the first nonenantiornithine bird in the avifauna in the Hukawng valley deposits. Given the unusual morphology of Oculudentavis (which is clearly unlike that of any other bird), there is a strong potential for new data to markedly alter our systematic conclusion. Regardless, this discovery highlights the capacity of amber to document vertebrate diversity that is unrecorded by other depositional environments.

Fig. 4: Simplified results of the strict consensus of 2,044 trees depicting the phylogenetic relationships of O. khaungraae relative to other known Mesozoic birds.
figure 4
The analysis (consisting of 36 taxa scored across 257 characters) was run in the TNT program using implied weighting (k = 16). Consistency index = 0.47; retention index = 0.645. In the analysis using a priori weights, Oculudentavis was resolved as an enantiornithine in a small percentage of the most-parsimonious trees. For most species for which skull material is known, the skull is reconstructed to scale relative to O. khaungraae. Scale bar, 2 cm. Names of species for which no skull material is known are written in grey.

Full size image
Note added in proof: Since this paper was accepted, an eight specimen that preserves the skeletal remains of an enantiornithine bird has been described42.

Methods
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

Material and photography
HPG-15-3 is housed and displayed in the Hupoge Amber Museum; the 3D printing models are available through the Dexu Institute of Palaeontology. HPG-15-3 was examined with a VH-Z100UT Universal Zoom Lens (100× to 1,000×) in an optical microscope (KEYENCE VHX-6000) with 100× magnification at Shenyang Normal University. Photographs were taken using a Canon digital camera (5D Mark III, MP-E 65MM F/2.8 1-5X) fitted to a macro rail (Cognisys) and processed using Helicon Focus 5.1 and Adobe Photoshop CS5 software.

Scanning and 3D reconstruction
HPG-15-3 was imaged nondestructively using propagation phase-contrast synchrotron radiation X-ray microtomography, on beamline 13W of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The SR beam was monochromatized at 22 keV using the double Si (111) crystal monochromator. The distance between sample and detector (propagation distance) was 60 mm to obtain the phase contrast. The physical pixel size of the charge-coupled device sensor was 6.5 μm × 6.5 μm, and we used a 2× microscope objective; the isotropic voxel size was 3.25 μm. The pixel number of our detector was 2,048 × 2,048 and its dynamic range was 16 bit. The field of the view of our detector was 6.6 mm × 6.6 mm.

Six microcomputed tomography scans under the same conditions were performed to image the whole specimen, owing to the fact its size in the vertical direction is much larger than the field of view of our detector. The off-axis scanning 360° mode was adopted to 3 scans because the size of the sample in the horizontal direction was larger than the field of view of the detector. In this mode, 6,000 projections were collected for a single computed tomography scan. The exposure time of a single projection was 0.3 s.

In the preprocessing of the off-axis scanning data, image stitching was the first step performed, considering the image alignment, the contrast unification and the tilt of the rotation axis. We obtained 3,000 stitched images with enlarged horizontal fields of view (about 6.6 mm × 13 mm) for 3,000 project angles. The phase retrieval and slice reconstruction of all the six projection datasets were performed using PITRE-3 software43. After the reconstruction, the computed-tomography slice sets for the six segments were stitched again in the vertical direction.

The computed tomography slices for the entire sample comprised 36 GB of data. To reduce the amount of memory used, the sampling interval was set as one pixel in all three directions, so that the data were reduced to one-eighth of their original size. The amber and all impurities surrounding the skull were removed using the image segmentation function. The rotation correction was performed using ImageJ software. The 3D data processing, segmentation and analysis were performed using VG StudioMax 1.2 and 2.1. The 3D morphology of the endocast was obtained through manual segmentation using ImageJ 1.4 and rendered using VG studio Max 2.4.

Scaling of eye socket and skull length
We assessed the allometry of the avian eye socket with phylogenetic generalized least squares44. We used a Brownian correlation matrix and maximum likelihood estimates of λ to summarize the slope estimates over 1,000 previously published time-calibrated trees