Approximately 60 million people lost their lives as a direct result of
the second world war, fully two-thirds of them noncombatants. The war’s losers,
the Axis states of Germany, Japan, and Italy, suffered more than
3 million civilian deaths; their conquerors, the Allies, suffered far
more: at least 35 million civilian deaths. 

An astonishing 10 to 20% of the total populations of the Soviet Union, Poland, and
Yugoslavia perished.  British
Prime Minister Winston S. Churchill, in characteristically vivid
prose, described postwar Europe as ‘a rubble heap, a charnel house,
a breeding ground of pestilence and hate’. 

Many of the largest cities of central and eastern Europe suffered
massive levels of devastation; 90% of the buildings in Cologne,
Düsseldorf, and Hamburg were gutted by Allied bombing, 70% of
the buildings in the centre of Vienna were destroyed. 

In Warsaw, reported John Hershey,
the Germans had ‘destroyed, systematically, street by street, alley by
alley, house by house. 

US Ambassador Arthur Bliss Lane, upon entering
that war-ravaged city of Warsaw in July 1945, wrote: ‘The sickening sweet
odor of burned human flesh was a grim warning that we were
entering a city of the dead.’ In France, fully one-fifth of the nation’s
buildings were damaged or destroyed; in Greece, one-quarter.

Soviet losses in the second world war were the most severe of all: at least 25 million dead,
another 25 million rendered homeless, 6 million buildings
destroyed, and much of the country’s industrial plant and
productive farmland laid to waste. Across Europe, an estimated 50
million of the war’s survivors had been uprooted by the war.

Almost all of Japan’s cities had been ravaged by relentless US bombing, with
40% of its urban areas completely destroyed. Tokyo, Japan’s
largest metropolis, was gutted by Allied firebombing that
levelled more than half of its buildings. 

The vast swath of death and destruction precipitated by the second world war left
not only much of Europe and Asia in ruins but the old international
order as well. ‘The whole world structure and order that we had
inherited from the nineteenth century was gone’, marvelled US
Assistant Secretary of State Dean Acheson.

It was the divergent aspirations, needs, histories, governing institutions, and
ideologies of the United States and the Soviet Union that turned
unavoidable tensions into the epic four-decade confrontation that
we call the Cold War. Scholars have employed the term ‘great power
condominium’ to describe the ensuing international order.

The United Stated lost some 400,000 of it's
soldiers and sailors in the struggle against the Axis
powers, approximately three-quarters of them on the battlefield, it
bears emphasizing that those numbers represent less than 1% of
the second world war's overall death toll and less than 2% of the losses suffered
by the Soviet Union in the second world war.

America's gross domestic
product doubled between 1941 and 1945. In March 1945, newly installed President Harry S. Truman was
merely stating the self-evident when he commented: 'We have
emerged from this war the most powerful nation in the world – the
most powerful nation, perhaps, in all history'. The director of the Office of War
Mobilization and Reconversion, commented that Americans 'are in the pleasant predicament
of having to learn to live 50 percent better than they have ever
lived before'.

The obsession with national security that
became so central a motif of US foreign and defence policy
throughout the Cold War era can be traced back directly to the
myth-puncturing events that culminated with the Japanese
strike of 7 December 1941 on Perl Harbor. 

Military strategists took several lessons from the bold Japanese
strike on Pearl Harbor - They became convinced, that America’s 
two ocean barrier no longer afforded sufficient protection from external assault and concluded that true security 
now required a defence that began well beyond the home shores – a defence in depth, in military parlance.

The concept of defence in depth led defence officials of the Roosevelt and Truman
administrations to advocate the establishment of an integrated,
global network of US-controlled air and naval bases, as well as the
negotiation of widespread military air transit rights. 

A sense of how extensive US military base requirements
were can be gleaned from a 1946 list of ‘essential’ sites compiled by
the State Department; it included, among other locales, Burma,
Canada, the Fiji Islands, New Zealand, Cuba, Greenland, Ecuador,
French Morocco, Senegal, Iceland, Liberia, Panama, Peru, and the
Azores.

US planners viewed the establishment of a free and more open international
economic system as indispensable to the new order they
were determined to construct in the aftermath of the second world war.
The Americans had learned that free trade stood as an essential
prerequisite for peace.

At the Bretton Woods Conference late in
1944, the United States gained general acceptance of the 
American formula, along with support for the establishment of two key
supranational bodies, the International Monetary Fund and the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World
Bank) charged with helping to stabilize the global economy.

The Soviet blueprint for postwar order was also born of deep-rooted
security fears as Soviet memories of Hitler’s surprise attack of June 1941 
were extremely painful due to the fact that of the 15 Soviet Republics, 9 had been occupied
in whole or in part by the Germans resulting in 25 million human lives lost
the destruction of 1700 cities and towns, and the loss of 31000 factories.

The overwhelming need to defend the Soviet homeland lay at the
heart of all Kremlin designs for the postwar world. Blocking the
Polish invasion route, or ‘gateway’, ranked foremost in that regard.
Poland, said Stalin, was ‘a matter of life or death’ to his country.

‘In the course of twenty-five years the Germans had twice invaded
Russia via Poland’, Soviet ruler Joseph Stalin told US envoy
Harry Hopkins in May 1945. He concluded that it was in Russia’s vital interest
that Poland should be strong and friendly.

In order to meet Soviet security needs, it was required that pro-Soviet 
governments be installed in Poland and other key Eastern
European states; that Soviet borders be expanded to their fullest
pre-revolutionary extent – meaning the permanent annexation of
the Baltic states and the eastern part of pre-war Poland; and that
Germany be weakened through a harsh occupation regime,
systematic de-industrialization, and extensive reparations
obligations.

Joseph Stalin was born in Georgia. Stalin was
in office from the mid-1920s until his death in 1953. As
many as 20 million Soviet citizens died as a direct or indirect
result of Stalin’s forced collectivization of Soviet agriculture
and systematic repression. 

At the wartime conference at Tehran, in November
1943, and throughout the following year, Stalin impressed upon
American President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill his fear that Germany would regain
its industrial and military power soon after the end of the second world war and
pose a mortal danger to the Soviet Union so he demanded vigorously for a harsh peace that would strip
Germany of both territory and industrial infrastructure.

In November 1944 Churchill and Stalin tentatively
approved the notorious ‘percentages agreements’, which purported
to divide much of the Balkans into zones of  British or
Russian influence. 

Roosevelt never signed on to the percentages agreements
since they represented too blatant a violation of the
principles of free and democratic self-determination that formed a
cornerstone of American plans for postwar political order.

Two competing Polish governments vied for international
recognition during the war years: one, headquartered in London,
was led by strongly anti-Soviet Polish nationalists; the other, set up
in the Polish city of Lublin, essentially served as a Soviet puppet
regime.

At the Yalta Conference of February 1945, the Americans and British agreed to
recognize the Soviet-backed Lublin government, provided that
Stalin broaden its representativeness and permit free elections. 

At the Yalta Conference Stalin accepted a Declaration on Liberated Europe and received the assurance that Germany would be forced to pay
reparations, out of which 10 billion dollars would be reserved for the Soviet Union.

The Soviet commitment to enter the war against Japan within three months
after the end of the Second World war was negotiated at the Yalta conference.
This marked a major diplomatic achievement for the United States, as did the
formal Soviet agreement to join the United Nations.

In July 1945, two months after the German surrender, US, British,
and Soviet leaders made one more effort to settle their
differences . They met in Potsdam, to discuss a wide range of issues, including
territorial adjustments in East Asia and the specific timing of Soviet
entry into the Pacific War.

The year 1946 marked the demise of the Grand Alliance
and the beginning of a fully fledged Cold War. On 5 March, Winston Churchill,
now out of power, publicly denounced the Soviet Union. In Fulton, Missouri, with an evidently approving
Harry Truman sharing the podium, the British wartime leader Churchill
railed: ‘From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron
curtain has descended across the Continent.’ Christian civilization
itself, Churchill warned, was now endangered by communist
expansionism.

On 21 February, the British Government informed the US State
Department that it could no longer afford to provide economic and
military assistance to Greece and Turkey. American officials quickly
determined that the United States must assume Britain’s former
role so as to block the possible spread of Soviet influence into the
eastern Mediterranean. 

President Truman, on 12 March, delivered a forceful address to Congress in which he
asked for $400 million in economic and military support for the
governments of Greece and Turkey as the Greek Government was fighting a civil war against
indigenous communists supplied by communist Yugoslavia while the
Turkish government, faced persistent Russian pressure for
concessions in the Dardanelles. 

Three months after president Truman’s epochal speech, the United States
publicly announced the second major phase of its diplomatic
offensive. Secretary of State George C. Marshall, during a Harvard
University commencement address, promised US aid to all
European countries willing to coordinate their recovery efforts. 

The Marshall Plan named after Secretary of State George C. Marshall sought to combat hunger, poverty, and
demoralization fuelling the rise of the left in postwar Europe. The Marshall
Plan eventually provided $13 billion in assistance to Western
Europe, helping to jump-start economic recovery there, encourage
European economic integration, and restore an important market
for American goods.

In September 1947, at a conference in
Poland, the Soviets established the Communist Information Bureau
(Cominform) as a means of tightening control over both their
satellite states in Eastern Europe and the communist parties of
Western Europe. 

Decrying the Marshall Plan as part of a concerted
strategy to forge a Western alliance that would serve as a ‘jumpingoff place for attacking the Soviet Union’, chief Russian delegate
Andrei Zhdanov said the world was now divided into ‘two camps’. 

The Soviet Union sponsored a coup in Czechoslovakia, in February 1948 which
led to the dismissal of all non-communist ministers
from the government, and left respected Foreign Minister Jan
Masaryk dead in its wake – in highly suspicious circumstances.

On 24 June 1948, in response
to the Anglo-American-French rehabilitation and consolidation of
West Germany, the Soviets suddenly halted all allied ground access
to West Berlin. 

By isolating the western enclave in that divided city,
located 125 miles within Soviet-occupied eastern Germany, Stalin
aimed to expose his adversaries’ vulnerability, thereby derailing the
establishment of the separate West German state he so feared.

Signed in
Washington on 4 April 1949, the North Atlantic Treaty brought together the Brussels
signatories, Italy, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Canada, and the
United States in a mutual security pact. Each of the member-states
consented to treat an attack on one or more as an attack on all.

US officials essentially treated
Japan, especially after 1947, as the Asian analogue to (West)
Germany: a nation whose advanced industrial infrastructure,
skilled workforce, and technological prowess made it both the
indispensable engine of regional economic growth and a Cold War
strategic asset of incalculable value.

From 1947 onwards, the Truman administration’s overriding Asian policy goal was to orient a stable, prosperous Japan to
the West. If Tokyo fell under communist influence, the Joint Chiefs
of Staff warned Truman, the ‘USSR would gain, thereby, an
additional war-making potential equal to 25% of her capacity’.